 

 
 
     Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western 
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from 
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill 
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of 
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.  
     'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth 
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has 
yet come here.' 
     They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made  
their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.  
If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard. 
Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his 
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn 
it was to watch. 
     `Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.' 
     `I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been 
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.' 
     `Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? ' 
     `Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn. 
     Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges 
gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too 
near, it seems.' 
     `I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are  not on this side 
of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than 
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard 
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these 
evil 
days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.  
We must go warily tomorrow.' 
     The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars 
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from 
beneath  with flames of  murky red; but  soon  it climbed above  them into a  
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with  gold. Frodo looked out 

####-eastward and  gazed at the tall island.  Its  si des  sprang sheer out of the 
running  water. High up above the  tall cliffs were  steep slopes upon which 
trees climbed, mounting  one  head above another; and  above them again were 
grey  faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by  a great spire  of  stone. Many 
birds were  circling  about it, but no sign of  other living things could be 
seen. 
     When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The  day has 
come at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have  long delayed. What 
shall  now become  of our Company that has  travelled  so far in fellowship?  
Shall we turn  west with  Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east  
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and 
that as each may choose? Whatever  we do  must  be done soon. We  cannot 
long 
halt here. The  enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I  fear that the 
Orcs may already be on this side of the water.' 
     There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved. 
     'Well,  Frodo,'  said Aragorn at last. `I fear that  the burden is laid 
upon  you. You are the  Bearer  appointed by the  Council. Your  own way you  
alone  can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and 
though I have tried to  bear his part, I do not know what design or hope  he 
had  for this hour,  if indeed he had any. Most  likely it seems that if  he 
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.' 
     Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I  know that haste 
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, 
and I will speak. Let me be alone! ' 
     Aragorn looked  at  him with  kindly  pity. `Very  well,  Frodo  son of 
Drogo,' he  said. `You shall have an hour, and  you  shall be alone. We will 
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.' 
     Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had  been watching 
his master with  great  concern, shook his  head and  muttered:  'Plain as a  
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' 
, 
     Presently Frodo  got  up and  walked away;  and Sam saw that  while the  
others restrained  themselves and did not stare at him,  the eyes of Boromir 
followed Frodo  intently, until he passed  out of sight in the  trees at the 
foot of Amon Hen. 
     Wandering  aimlessly at first in the  wood, Frodo found  that his  feet 

####-were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the 
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had 
been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of 
trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he 
came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a  
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was 
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the 
River, far  below  him, to Tol  Brandir and the birds wheeling in the  great 
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a  
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. 
     He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring 
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo 
left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered  
everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and 
still he was no nearer to a choice. 
     Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him that 
something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up 
and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face 
was smiling and kind. 
     `I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is 
right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least  
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now 
and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where 
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together  
may perhaps find wisdom.' 
     `You are kind,'  answered Frodo. 'But  I do not think  that  any speech 
will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it, 
Boromir: afraid.' 
     Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in 
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered. 
     Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not 
suffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in  your 
hard choice. Will you not take mine? ' 
     'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said 
Frodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.' 
     `Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply. 
     'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of 

####-the  burden  that  is laid on me. Against -well,  if it must be said, against  
trust in the strength and truth of Men.' 
     `Yet that  strength has  long  protected you far  away  in  your little 
country, though you knew it not.' 
     'I do not doubt the valour of  your  people. But the world is changing. 
The  walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong enough. If 
they fail, what then? ' 
     'We shall fall in battle valiantly.  Yet there is still hope  that they 
will not fail.' 
     'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo. 
     'Ah! The Ring! '  said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not 
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt  for so  small a  
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House 
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 
     Frodo looked  up. His heart went suddenly cold.  He caught the  strange 
gleam in  Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind  and friendly.  'It is 
best that it should lie hidden,' he answered. 
     'As you wish. I care  not,' said Boromir.  'Yet may I not even speak of 
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands  of the Enemy:  
of  its evil  uses not  of its good.  The  world is changing, you say. Minas 
Tirith will fall,  if the Ring lasts. But why?  Certainly, if the  Ring were 
with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? ' 
     'Were you not at the Council?  ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot use  
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.' 
     Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go  on,' he cried. 
'Gandalf, Elrond -- all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves 
they may be right. These  elves and half-elves and  wizards, they would come 
to grief perhaps.  Yet often I  doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. 
But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they  will  not be corrupted. We 
of Minas Tirith have been  staunch  through long years  of trial. We do  not 
desire  the  power  of  wizard-lords,  only  strength  to  defend ourselves, 
strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the 
-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad 
not to use it, to  use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the 
ruthless, these alone will  achieve victory.  What could not a warrior do in 
this  hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why 

####-not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would 
drive the 
hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' 
     Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed 
to have forgotten Frodo, while  his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the 
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious 
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king, 
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.  
     'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not sa y  destroy 
it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does 
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk  
blindly into  Mordor and offer  the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for  
himself. Folly! 
     'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo 
again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon 
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?' 
     'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have 
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 
     `Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were 
shining and his face eager. 
     `You misunderstand me,' said Frodo. 
     'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city 
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from 
here.  We have  been long in the  wilderness, and you need  news of what the 
Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said. 
`You 
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the 
hobbit's  shoulder in friendly fashion;  but Frodo  felt  the hand trembling 
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the 
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. 
     `Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither  
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my  
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make 
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! ' 
     `No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 
     `It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir. 
`How it  angers  me!   Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and 

####-ruining our cause.  If any mortals have claim  to the Ring, it is the men of 
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!  ' 
     Frodo  did not answer, but moved away  till the great  flat stone stood 
between them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your  doubt and  fear? You can lay the 
blame on me, if you  will.  You  can say that I was too strong and took it by 
force. For I am  too strong for you, halfling,' he cried;  and  suddenly  he 
sprang  over the stone  and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face  was 
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. 
     Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only 
one thing he could do: trembling  he pulled  out the Ring upon its chain and 
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him  again.  The 
Man  gasped, stared for a  moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking 
here and there among the rocks and trees. 
     'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. `Let me  get my  hands on you! Now I 
see your mind. You  will take the Ring  to Sauron and  sell us all. You have 
only waited  your  chance to  leave  us  in  the  lurch. Curse  you and  all 
halflings to death  and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on  a stone,  he 
fell sprawling and  lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his 
own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 
     He rose and  passed  his  hand  over his eyes, dashing away  the tears.  
'What have I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.  
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' 
     There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was  already 
far  away, leaping  blindly up  the path to the hill -top. Terror  and  grief 
shook  him, seeing in  his thought the  mad fierce face of Boromir,  and his 
burning eyes. 
     Soon  he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,  gasping 
for breath. He saw as through a mist a  wide  flat circle, paved with mighty 
flags, and surrounded with  a crumbling battlement;  and in the middle,  set 
upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. 
Up  he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like  a lost  child that 
had clambered upon the throne of mountain-kings.  
     At first he could see little. He seemed  to be in a  world of  mist  in 
which  there were only shadows: the Ring  was upon him.  Then here and there 
the mist gave way and he saw  many visions: small and clear as if they  were 

####-under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright 
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was 
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men 
of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,  
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a 
ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken 
teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, 
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below 
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over 
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of 
sea -birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green 
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.  
     But everywhere he looked he saw  the signs of  war. The Misty Mountains 
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.  
Under the  boughs of  Mirkwood there was  deadly strife of Elves and Men and 
fell  beasts. The  land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien. 
     Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from  
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of 
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon 
horses, 
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was 
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it 
seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its 
mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were 
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward, 
unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the 
grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked 
upon Gorgoroth,  the  valley of terror  in the  Land  of Mordor. Darkness lay 
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, 
and 
a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall, 
battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron. 
All hope left him. 

####-     And suddenly he felt the  Eye. There was an eye  in the Dark Tower that 
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze.  A fierce eager  
will  was there.  It leaped  towards him; almost  like a finger he  felt it, 
searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon  Lhaw it touched. It glanced  upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. 
     He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I  come, I 
come to  you? He could not tell. Then  as a flash  from some other point  of 
power there  came  to  his mind another thought: Take it off!  Take  it off! 
Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! 
     The two powers strove in him. For a moment,  perfectly balanced between 
their piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tormented. Suddenly  he was aware  of 
himself  again. Frodo, neither  the  Voice nor the Eye: free to choose,  and 
with  one  remaining  instant in  which to  do so. He  took the Ring off his 
finger. He  was kneeling in clear  sunlight before  the  high  seat. A black  
shadow seemed to  pass like an arm above him; it  missed Amon Hen and 
groped 
out west,  and faded. Then all the sky was  clean and blue and birds sang in 
every tree. 
     Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him,  but his will was 
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I  will do now what I 
must,' he said.  'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at 
work even in the Company,  and the Ring must leave them before it  does more 
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot  trust, and  those I  can trust are too 
dear  to me: poor old  Sam,  and Merry and  Pippin. Strider,  too: his heart 
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen 
into evil. I will go alone. At once.' 
     He went quickly  down the path and came back to the lawn where  Boromir 
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and  
calls from the woods near the shore below.  
     'They'll be hunting  for  me,' he  said. `I wonder how long I have been 
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can  I  do? ' he muttered. 
'I must go now or I shall never go.  I shan't  get  a  chance  again. I hate 
leaving them, and like  this without  any explanation. But surely  they will 
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 
     Slowly he  drew out the Ring and put it  on  once more. He vanished and  
passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. 

####-     The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and 
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other  
things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of 
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land  of the 
Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great 
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words 
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why  
was 
he hesitating?  
     `He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said 
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company 
to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the 
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. 
     `We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord 
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond 
his power: either to keep the Burden  secret. or to hold  off the full might 
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in 
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.' 
     'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our 
minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call 
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.' 
     `And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help 
the  Bearer along the  road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us 
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting 
from 
Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the 
last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose 
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.' 
     `And I  too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now 
to say farewell.' 
     'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But 
if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all 
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, 
or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three 

####-companions:  Sam, who  could not  bear it otherwise; and  Gimli; and myself.  
Boromir  will return to his own city,  where his father and his  people need 
him; and with him the others should go, or at  least Meriadoc  and Peregrin , 
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.' 
     `That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
I  always intended to go wherever he went,  and we still  do. But we did not 
realize what that would mean. It  seemed different so far away, in the Shire 
or in Rivendell. It  would  be mad and cruel to let Frodo go  to Mordor. Why  
can't we stop him?' 
     'We must stop  him,'  said Pippin.  `And  that is what  he  is worrying 
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And  he doesn't  
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to 
Mordor  alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly  old hobbit, he ought 
to know that he  hasn't got to ask.  He ought  to know that if we can't stop 
him, we shan't leave him.' 
     'Begging  your  pardon,'  said  Sam. 'I don't  think you understand  my 
master  at all.  He isn't hesitating about which way  to  go. Of course not! 
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your 
pardon, 
Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that 
Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on  the outside of the circle, 
was no longer there. 
     `Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried.  'He's been a bit 
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's  not in this business. He's off to 
his  home, as he always said;  and no blame to  him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows 
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom,  if  he can. But he's  afraid . Now it's 
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of 
course  he's had  a bit of schooling, so to speak-we  all have-since we left 
home, or  he'd be so terrified he'd just  fling  the Ring in the  River  and 
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us 
either: whether we'll  go along with him or no. He knows we mean to.  That's 
another thing that's  bothering  him. If  he  screws himself up to go, he'll 
want to go alone. Mark my words!  We're going to  have trouble when he 
comes 
back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' 
     'I believe  you speak more  wisely than any of us,  Sam,' said Aragorn. 
`And what shall we do, if you prove right? ' 

####-     'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin. 
     'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the 
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 
the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are 
other powers at work far stronger.' 
     `Well, I wish  Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us 
get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?  
' 
     `Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing 
away. We must call for him.' 
     At  that  moment Boromir  reappeared.  He  came out from the  trees and 
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He 
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with 
his eyes on the ground. 
     `Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? ' 
     Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly. 
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to  
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He 
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard 
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I 
thought he would return to you.' 
     'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not 
too kindly at Boromir. 
     `Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.' 
     `This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!' 
     'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the 
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.' 
     `But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 
now.' 
     `How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. 
     `Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have 
wandered for  some time since.  I do not  know! I do not know! ' He  put his 
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.  
     `An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him at 
once. Come on! ' 

####-     `Wait  a moment!  ' cried Aragorn. `We must  divide up into pairs,  and 
arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' 
     It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed  off  first. 
Merry  and Pippin  had followed, and were already disappearing westward into 
the trees  by  the  shore,  shouting:  Frodo! Frodo!  in  their clear,  high 
hobbit-voices. Legolas and  Gimli were running.  A  sudden  panic or madness 
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 
     `We  shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir!  I do 
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help  now! Go after 
those  two  young hobbits,  and guard them at  the least, even if you cannot 
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I 
shall return soon.' 
     Aragorn  sprang swiftly away and  went in pursuit of  Sam. Just  as  he 
reached the  little lawn among the rowans  he  overtook him, toiling uphill, 
panting and calling, Frodo! 
     `Come with me, Sam! '  he said.  `None of us should be alone.  There is 
mischief about. I feel it.  I am going to the top, to  the Seat of Amon Hen, 
to  see what may be   seen. And look! It is  as  my heart guessed, Frodo went  
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. 
     Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and 
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead. 
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 
     `Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee! ' he said aloud. `Your legs are too short, so  use 
your head! Let me  see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not  his way; but he 
hasn't  told  us everything. Something scared Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He screwed 
himself up  to the point,  sudden. He made up his mind  at last to go. Where 
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel 
hard.' 
     Sam passed his hand over  his eyes, brushing  away the  tears. 'Steady, 
Gamgee!  ' he said. `Think,  if you can!  He can't fly across rivers, and he 
can't  jump  waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's  got  to get back to  the 
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!  ' 
     Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 
he  got and ran on.  He  came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen  by the 
shore, where the boats were  drawn up out  of the  water.  No one was there.  
There  seemed to be cries in  the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He 
stood gazing for a moment. stock -still, gaping.  A boat was sliding down the 

####-bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat 
slipped into the wat 
 
128d 
 
er. 
     `Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the 
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a  yard. With  a  cry 
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
under, and the River closed over his curly head. 
     An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and 
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he 
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.  
     `Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! ' 
     `Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your 
hand.' 
     `Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and 
don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side, 
and let me use the paddle! ' 
     With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was 
able to scramble out, wet  as a  water -rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and 
stepped ashore again. 
     `Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said. 
     'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying 
to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be 
now?  ' 
     `Safely on my way.' 
     `Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't  
have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.' 
     'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I 
could not have borne that.' 
     `Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam. 
     `But I am going to Mordor.' 
     `I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming 
with you.' 
     `Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming 
back  at any  minute.  If  they  ca tch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and 

####-explain, and I shall never have  the heart  or  the chance to get off. But I 
must go at once. It's the only way.' 
     `Of course  it is,' answered  Sam.  'But not alone. I'm  coming too, or  
neither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 
     Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart. 
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you  can't come like  this without 
your gear or food or anything.' 
     'Just  hold on a moment, and  I'll  get my stuff!' cried  Sam  eagerly. 
'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place,  fished out  his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it  when  he 
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a  spare blanket, and some 
extra packages of food, and ran back. 
     `So all my  plan is spoilt!  ' said Frodo.  `It is  no good  trying  to 
escape you. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is 
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 
again.' 
     `Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. 
     So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River  bore them swiftly away. down the 
western arm, and past  the frowning cliffs  of Tol  Brandir. The roar of the 
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help  as Sam could give, it was hard 
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 
     At  length  they  came to land  again  upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Lhaw. There  they found a shelving shore, and they  drew the  boat out, high 
above the water ,  and hid it as well  as  they could behind a great boulder. 
Then  shouldering their  burdens,  they set off, seeking a  path  that would  
bring them over  the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and  down into the Land of 
Shadow. 
  

####-     
Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
     The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted 
in it are dominated by ORTHANC,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress 
of MINAS MORGUL  that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of 
the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until 
the coming of the Great Darkness. 
     The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING. 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK III *  

Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir 

 
 
     Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. 
Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to 
read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet 
earth he saw what he was seeking. 
     'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the 
hill-top. I wonder what he  saw there? But he returned by  the same way, and 
went down the hill again.' 
     Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to 
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was 
pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the 
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked 
out. But the  sun seemed darkened,  and the world dim and remote.  He turned 
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,  
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle 
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. 
     Even as he  gazed his  quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,  
on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among 
them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then 
suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it 
smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above 
the roaring of the falls. 
     'The horn of  Boromir!' he cried. 'He is  in need!' He  sprang down the 
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, 
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?' 
     As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the 
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly 
the horn-calls  ceased.  Aragorn  raced  down the last slope,  but before he 
could reach  the hill's foot, the sounds died away;  and as he turned to the 
left and ran towards them  they  retreated, until at last he could hear them 
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying Elendil!  Elendil!  he crashed 
through the trees.  

####-     A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake 
he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was 
resting.  But  Aragorn saw  that he was pierced  with  many  black -feathered 
arrows; his sword  was still in his hand, but it  was  broken near the hilt; 
his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about 
him and at his feet. 
     Aragorn knelt beside him.  Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. 
At last slow  words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I  
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;  twenty at 
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I 
think they  are  not  dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and  his eyes closed 
wearily. After a moment he spoke again. 
     'Farewell, Aragorn!  Go to  M inas Tirith  and  save my  people!  I have 
failed.' 
     'No!'  said  Aragorn,  taking his hand and kissing  his brow. 'You have 
conquered. Few  have gained such a  victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall  
not fall!' 
     Boromir smiled. 
     'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn. 
     But Boromir did not speak again. 
     'Alas!' said  Aragorn. 'Thus  passes the  heir of Denethor, Lord of the 
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all  in ruin. It is 
I that  have failed. Vain was Gandalf's  trust in me.  What  shall I do now?  
Boromir has laid it on  me  to go  to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; 
but where are the  Ring and the Bearer? How shall I  find them  and save the  
Quest from disaster?' 
     He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. 
So it  was  that Legolas  and  Gimli  found him.  They came from the western 
slopes of the hill, silently, creeping  through  the  trees as if  they were 
hunting. Gimli had  his axe in hand,  and  Legola s  his long knife:  all his 
arrows were spent. When  they came into the  glade they halted in amazement; 
and  then they stood a moment with heads bowed  in  grief,  for it seemed to 
them plain what had happened. 
     'Alas!'  said Legolas, coming to  Aragorn's  side. 'We have  hunted and 
slain many  Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use  here. We 
came when we heard the horn-but too late, it  seems. I  fear  you have taken 
deadly hurt.' 

####-     'Boromir  is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed,  for  I was not here 
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.' 
     'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?' 
     'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told 
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I 
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam 
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has 
gone amiss. What is to be done now?' 
     'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him 
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.' 
     'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We 
must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living 
prisoners.' 
     'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said 
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice 
is now before us!' 
     'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the 
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A 
cairn we might build.' 
     'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could 
use nearer than the water -side,' said Gimli. 
     'Then  let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his 
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and  
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil 
creature dishonours his bones.' 
     Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords 
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we 
find  tokens!' He picked  out  from the  pile  of grim weapons  two  knives,  
leaf-bladed, damasked  in go ld and red;  and searching further he found also 
the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said. 
'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but 
feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  wha t  they  are:  work  of 
Westernesse, wound about with spells  for the  bane of Mordor. Well, now, if 
they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,  
hoping against hope, to give them back.' 
     'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for  
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and 

####-found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows 
as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. 
     And  Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here  lie many that are 
not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty  Mountains, if I 
know  anything of Orcs and their kinds.  And here are others  strange to me.  
Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!' 
     There were four goblin-soldiers of greater  stature, swart, slant-eyed, 
with thick  legs and  large hands. They  were armed with short  broad-bladed 
swords, not with  the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows  of 
yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.  Upon their shields they bore 
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on  the 
front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal. 
     'I have not seen  these tokens  before,'  said Aragorn.  'What  do they 
mean?' 
     'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.' 
     'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.' 
     'Neither  does he  use  his right name,  nor permit it  to be  spelt or 
spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does  not use white. The  Orcs in the service 
of Barad-dyr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought. 
'S is for Saruman, I  guess,'  he  said at length. 'There  is evil afoot  in 
Isengard,  and the West is no longer safe. It is  as Gandalf feared: by some 
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that 
he  knows  of  Gandalf's  fall.  Pursuers  from Moria may  have escaped  the 
vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard 
by other  paths. Orcs travel  fast.  But  Saruman has many  ways of learning 
news. Do you remember the birds?' 
     'Well,  we  have no time to ponder riddles,' said  Gimli. 'Let us  bear 
Boromir away!' 
     'But  after that  we  must guess  the riddles, if we  are to choose our 
course rightly,' answered Aragorn. 
     'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli. 
     Taking his axe the  Dwarf now  cut  several branches. These they lashed 
together with bowstrings, and spread their  cloaks upon the frame. Upon this 
rough bier they carried the  body of  their companion to the shore, together  
with such trophies of  his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. 
It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for  Boromir was  a  
man both tall and strong. 

####-     At the water -side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas 
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth  Galen. It was  a mile or more, and 
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the 
shore. 
     'There is a strange tale  to tell!'  said Legolas. 'There are  only two 
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.' 
     'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn. 
     'We saw no signs of  them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs  would have taken 
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.' 
     'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn. 
     Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him 
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head. 
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden 
belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and 
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his 
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening  
the  prow to the stern of the other boat,  they drew him out into the water. 
They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift -running channel 
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep  sides of  Tol Brandir  
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of 
Rauros rose and  shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder 
of the falls shook the windless air . 
     Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay, 
restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream 
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated 
by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the 
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging. 
The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in 
Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the 
morning. But  in Gondor in after -days it long  was said that  the elven-boat 
rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath, 
and  past the many mouths of Anduin, out  into the Great Sea at night  under  
the stars. 
     For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him. 
Then  Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said, 
'but he will not return from mountain or from  sea.' Then slowly he began to 
sing: 

####-     Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 
     The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes. 
     'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?  
     Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?' 
     'I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey; 
     I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away 
     Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more. 
     The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor.'  
     'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, 
     But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'  
      
Then Legolas sang: 
 
     From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones; 
     The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. 
     'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? 
     Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'  
     'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie 
     On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; 
     So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. 
     Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'  
     'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, 
     But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'  
     Then Aragorn sang again: 
     From the  Gate  of Kings  the  North Wind rides,  and past the  roaring falls;  
     And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 
     'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? 
     What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'  
     'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought. 
     His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought. 
     His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; 
     And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'  
     'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 
     To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end o f days.'  
 
     So they ended. Then they  turned  their boat and drove it with all  the 
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. 
     'You left the  East Wind to  me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of 
it.' 
     'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In  Minas Tirith  they endure 
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken 

####-his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.' 
     He surveyed the green  lawn, quickly but  thoroughly, stooping often to 
the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing 
can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and 
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since 
the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the 
rill  from the  spring  trickled  out into  the River. 'There are some clear 
prints here,' he  said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and  back; but  I 
cannot say how long ago.' 
     'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli. 
     Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and 
looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is 
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answe r: 
Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have 
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to 
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and  
came  back here before Frodo had gone. He did  not find it easy to leave Sam 
behind!' 
     'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli. 
'That was a strange deed!' 
     'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did 
not wish to  lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he 
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that  overcame his fear 
and doubt.' 
     'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.  
     'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What 
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did  
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret. 
     'Well,  so much  at  least  is now clear,'  said Legolas:  'Frodo is no 
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam 
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.' 
     'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat 
and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope 
either way. We have already lost precious hours.' 
     'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and 
change the  evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I  
will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor  

####-and  gone with  him to the end; but if I  seek him now  in the wilderness, I 
must abandon the captives to torment  and death.  My heart speaks clearly at 
last: the fate  of the Bearer  is in  my  hands no  longer .  The Company has 
played  its part. Yet we that  remain cannot forsake our companions while we 
have strength left.  Come!  We  will go  now. Leave  all  that can be spared 
behind! We will press on by day and dark!' 
     They drew up the  last  boat  and carried  it to  the trees.  They laid 
beneath  it such of their goods  as  they did not  need  and could not carry 
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back  
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the 
Orcs. It needed little skill to find. 
     'No other folk  make such  a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems  their 
delight to slash and beat down  growing  things that are not even  in  their 
way.' 
     'But they go with a great  speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they 
do not  tire. And later we  may have  to  search for our  path  in hard bare 
lands.' 
     'Well, after  them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can  go swiftly, and they 
do not tire sooner  than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long 
start.' 
     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we  shall all need the endurance of  Dwarves. But 
come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And 
woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We  will make such a chase as shall be  
accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men. 
Forth 
the Three Hunters!' 
     Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led 
them,  tireless and swift, now that his mind  was at last made up. The woods 
about the lake they left behind. Long slopes  they climbed, dark, hard-edged 
against the  sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away,  grey 
shadows in a stony land. 
 
