 

 
 
     The Prancing Pony 
     Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, 
like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there 
was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little 
further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round 
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland  
only a few miles broad. 
     The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful 
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more 
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of 
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to 
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and wer e the descendants 
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few 
had survived the turmoils of  the Elder  Days; but  when the  Kings returned 
again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they 
were st ill there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the 
grass. 
     In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within 
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were 
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing 
of 
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were 
believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the 
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards 
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. 
When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten 
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 
of them. 
     There were  also many families  of hobbits  in the  Bree-land  and they 
claimed to be  the oldest  settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that  was 
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized. 
They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,  
especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men. 

####-The  Big  Folk and  the  Little Folk  (as they  called one another) were  on  
friendly  terms,  minding their  own affairs in  their own  ways,  but  both 
rightly regarding  themselves as  necessary parts of the Bree-folk.  Nowhere 
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 
     The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did  not themselves travel much; and the 
affairs  of the  four villages  were their  chief concern. Occasionally  the 
Hobbits  of Bree went as far as  Buckland, or the  Eastfarthing; but  though 
their  link land  was not  much  further  than a  day's  riding  east of the 
Brandywine Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of the Shire  now seldom  visited  it.  An 
occasional Bucklander or  adventurous Took would come  out to  the Inn for a  
night  or  two, but  even  that  was  becoming  less  and  less  usual.  The 
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond 
the  borders,   as  Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them, 
considering them dull  and uncouth. There were probably  many more 
Outsiders 
scattered about in the West  of the World in those days than  the  people of 
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no  better than  tramps, ready  to  
dig a hole in any bank and  stay only as long as it suited them.  But in the 
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and  prosperous, and no more 
rustic tha n most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten 
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going  between 
the 
Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.  
     The village of Bree had some  hundred  stone houses  of  the Big  Folk, 
mostly above the Road, nestling  on the hillside with  windows looking west. 
On that side, running in  more  than half a circle from the hill and back to 
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the  inner side.   Over  this 
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred 
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road 
ran out of the village. The  gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside 
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.  
     Down on  the Road, where it swept to the right to  go round the foot of 
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic 
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;  
another ancient road  crossed  the  East  Road  just outside (he dike at the 
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various 
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying 

####-in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North, 
South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used 
to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,  
and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the 
Bree-folk called it the Greenway. 
     The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an 
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and 
inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;  
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly 
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.  
     It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his 
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village. 
They came to the West -gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge 
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and 
looked over  the gate at them in surprise. 
     'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. 
     'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying 
east and cannot go further tonight.' 
     'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their 
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if  speaking to himself. He  stared at 
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride 
through. 
     'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went 
on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what 
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?' 
     'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good  
place  to  discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of  the man or  the 
tone of his voice. 
     'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my 
business to ask questions after nightfall.' 
     'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to 
stay at the  inn here,' put  in Merry. 'I am  Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough 
for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had 
heard.' 
     'All right, all right!' said the man.  'I  meant no offence. But you'll 
find  maybe that more  folk  than old Harry  at the  gate will be asking you  
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go  on to  The Pony, you'll find 

####-you're oat the only guests.' 
     He wished  them  good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see 
in  the lantern-light  that the  man was still eyeing them curiously. He was 
glad to  hear  the gate clang  to  behind  them,  as they rode  forward.  He 
wondered why the man was  so suspicious, and whether any one had been 
asking 
for news of a party of hobbits. Could  it have been Gandalf? He  might  have 
arrived, while they  were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was 
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.  
     The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to  
his house. As soon as his  back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in  
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. 
     The  hobbits rode on up a  gentle slope, passing a few detached  houses, 
and  drew up outside the  inn. The houses looked large  and strange to them.  
Sam stared up at the inn  with its three  storeys and many windows, and felt 
his  heart sink. He  had imagined  himself meeting giants taller than trees, 
and other creatures  even more terrifying, some time or other  in the course 
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of  Men and 
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring 
day. He  pictured  black horses standing all  saddled in  the shadows of the 
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. 
     'We  surely aren't going  to stay here for the night,  are we, sir?' he 
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk  in these  pans, why  don't we look for  
some  that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.' 
     'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil  recommended it. 
I expect it's homelike enough inside.' 
     Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. 
It had a front on  the Road, and two wings running  back on land partly  cut 
out  of the lower  slopes of the hill, so  that at the rear the second-floor 
windows were level  with the  ground.  There  was a wide  arch  leading to a  
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was  a  
large doorway reached by  a few  broad  steps. The  door  was open and light 
streamed out of it. Above the arch  there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a  
large signboard: a  fat white pony reared up on  its hind legs. Over the door 
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN  
BUTTERBUR. Many 
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.  

####-     As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry 
song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They 
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their 
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 
     They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the 
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a  
short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and 
was  bustling out of  one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden 
with full mugs.  
     'Can we--' began Frodo. 
     'Half a minute, if  you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and 
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out 
again, wiping his hands on his apron. 
     'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be 
wanting?' 
     'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed. 
Are you Mr. Butterbur?' 
     'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!  
You 're from the Shire,  eh?' he said, and  then suddenly he clapped his hand  
to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. 
'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' 
     'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said   Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My 
name is Underhill.' 
     'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone 
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet; 
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the 
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But  there is 
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long 
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree. 
     'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where  are  you, you woolly-footed  slow-coach?  
Nob!' 
     'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door, 
and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great 
interest.  
     'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!  
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's 
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted 

####-off with a grin and a wink. 
     'Well, now, what wa s  I going to  say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his 
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight, 
my head is going round. There's  a party that came up the Greenway from 
down 
South last night - and that was strange enough to  begin with. Then there's a  
travelling  company  of dwarves  going  West come  in  this evening. And now 
there's you.  If you weren't  hobbits, I  doubt  if  we could house you. But 
we've  got  a room or two  in the  north wing  that  were made  special  for 
hobbits, when this  place was built.  On  the  ground  floor as they usually 
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable. 
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' 
     He led them a short  way  down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a  
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that 
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard  work for two legs,  
but I  don't get thinner. I'll look  in again  la ter.  If you want anything, 
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!' 
     Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed 
capable of  an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They  found 
themselves in a small and cosy room. There  was a bit of bright fire burning  
on  the hearth,  and in front of it  were some low  and comfortable  chairs.  
There  was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a  
large hand-bell. But  Nob, the  hobbit servant, came bustling in long before 
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.  
     'Will you be wanting anything  to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall 
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready? ' 
     They were  washed and in the middle of good deep mugs  of beer when Mr. 
Butterbur and  Nob  came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid.  There 
was hot soup, cold meats, a  blackberry  tart,  new loaves, slabs of butter, 
and half  a ripe  cheese: good plain food, as good  as the Shire could show, 
and homelike enough to  dispel  the last of  Sam's misgivings (already  much 
relieved by the excellence of the beer). 
     The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them. 
'I don't  know whether  you would care  to  join the company, when  you have 
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your 
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you , if  you  had a 
mind.  We don't get  Outsiders  -  travellers from the  Shire, I should  say, 

####-begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story 
or song you may have in mind.  But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack  
anything!' 
     So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper 
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary 
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it  
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and 
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't  
forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still on the 
high-road and not very far from the Shire!' 
     'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't  
forget that it is safer indoors!' 
     The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was 
large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light. 
This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from 
the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was 
standing  near the  fire, talking  to  a couple  of dwarves and one  or  two 
strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of   Bree, a  
collection of local  hobbits  (sitting  chattering  together),  a  few  more 
dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows 
and comers.  
     As soon as the Shire-hobbits  entered, there  was  a  chorus of welcome 
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the 
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to 
the Bree-folk, so  quickly  that, though they caught  many  names, they were 
seldom  sure who the names belonged to.  The Men of Bree seemed  all to have 
rather  botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names,  like Rushlight, 
Goatleaf,  Heathertoes,  Appledore, Thistlewool and  Ferny (not  to  mention  
Butterbur).  Some  of  the hobbits  had  similar  names.  The  Mugworts, for  
instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as 
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which 
were 
used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they 
could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to  
their hearts as a long-lost cousin. 
     The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo 
soon found that  some  explanation  of  what he was doing would  have  to be 

####-given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which  
there was much wagging of heads, although neither  of these words  were much 
used in the  Bree-dialect). He said  he  was thinking of writing a  book (at 
which there was  silent astonishment), and that he and his friends  wanted to  
collect information about  hobbits living  outside the Shire,  especially in 
the eastern lands. 
     At this  a  chorus of voices broke  out. If Frodo had  really wanted to 
write a  book,  and  had  had  many ears, he  would  have learned enough for  
several chapters  in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given  
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he  could 
go for further information. But after a time, a s Frodo did not show any sign 
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about 
doings in  the Shire. Frodo did not  prove  very communicative,  and he soon 
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around. 
     The Men and  Dwarves were mostly talking of  distant events and telling 
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There  was trouble away 
in the South, and it seemed that the  Men who had  come up the Greenway 
were 
on  the  move,  looking for   lands  where they  could  find some  peace. The 
Bree-folk were  sympathetic, but plainly  not  very  ready to  take  a large 
number  of  strangers  into  their little land. One  of  the  travellers,  a  
squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling  that more  and more people 
would  be  coming north in  the near future. 'If  room isn't found for them, 
they'll  find it for  themselves.  They've a  right  to live,  same as other 
folk,'  he said  loudly. The  local inhabitants did not look  pleased at the 
prospect. 
     The hobbits  did not pay much attention to all this,  and it did not at 
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big  Folk could hardly  beg for lodgings 
in hobbit-holes. They were more  interested in Sam and Pippin,  who were now 
feeling quite  at home, and were chatting  gaily about events in the  Shire. 
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the 
roof of the Town  Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor,  and the 
fattest hobbit  in the Westfarthing, had  been buried in chalk, and came out 
like a floured  dumpling. But there were several questions asked  that  made 
Frodo a little uneasy. One of  the Bree-landers, who seemed to  have been in 
the Shire  several times, wanted to know where the  Underhills lived and who 
they were related to. 

####-     Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather -beaten man, 
sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the 
hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a  
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him, 
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much 
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-
green 
cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he 
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 
seen as he watched the hobbits. 
     'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr. 
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?' 
     'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye 
without  turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering 
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare 
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he 
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't  
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's 
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;  
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no 
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the 
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at 
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his 
last remark remained unexplained. 
     Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he  had heard or  
guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a  
nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be  
threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey, 
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.  
     'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to 
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' 
     'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the 
stare of those keen eyes.  
     'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider,  'if I were  you, I should stop 
your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink , fire,  and chance-meeting 
are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk  
about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry 

####-smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And  there have been even stranger travellers 
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. 
     Frodo returned his  gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no  further  
sign.  His  attention  seemed  suddenly to be fixed on Pippin.  To his alarm 
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success 
with  the fat  Mayor of  Michel  Delving, was  now actually  giving a  comic 
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the 
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance. 
     Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most  of the local 
hobbits, no doubt: just a  funny story about  those funny people away beyond 
the River;  but some (old Butterbur, for instance)  knew a thing or two, and 
had probably heard rumours long ago about  Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring 
the name of Baggins to their minds,  especially  if there had been inquiries 
in Bree after that name. 
     Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what to  do.  Pippin  was  evidently  much 
enjoying  the attention he was getting,  and had  become  quite forgetful of 
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even 
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.  
     'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. 
     Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to  talk. The attention 
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the  hobbits looked at Frodo and 
laughed and clapped, thinking that  Mr. Underhill  had taken as  much ale as 
was good for him. 
     Frodo  suddenly felt very foolish,  and found himself (as was his habit 
when making a speech) fingering  the things in his pocket. He felt the  Ring  
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on 
and vanish out of the silly  situation. It seemed to him,  somehow, as if me 
suggestion came to him from outside,  from someone or  something a the room. 
He resisted the  temptation firmly, and clasped  the Ring in his hand, as if 
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief.  At 
any rate it  gave him no inspiration. He spoke  'a  few suitable  words', as 
they  would have said  in the  Shire: We  are all  very much gratified by the 
kindness of your reception, and  I  venture to hope that my brief visit will 
help to  renew  the old ties of  friendship between the Shire and Bree;  and 
then he hesitated and coughed. 
     Everyone in the room was now  looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one  of 
the hobbits.  'A song! A song!' shouted all the others.  'Come on now, master, 

####-sing us something that we haven't heard before!' 
     For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a  
ridiculous song tha t Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud 
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is 
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a  
few words of it are now, as a rule, remember ed. 
     There is an inn, a merry old inn 
     beneath an old grey hill, 
     And there they brew a beer so brown  
     That the Man in the Moon himself came down  
     one night to drink his fill. 
 
     The ostler has a tipsy cat 
     that plays a five-stringed fiddle; 
     And up and down he runs his bow,  
     Now squeaking high, now purring low,  
     now sawing in the middle. 
 
     The landlord keeps a little dog 
     that is mighty fond of jokes; 
     When there's good cheer among the guests, 
     He cocks an ear at all the jests 
     and laughs until he chokes. 
 
     They also keep a horned cow 
     as proud as any queen; 
     But music turns her head like ale, 
     And makes her wave her tufted tail 
     and dance upon the green. 
 
     And O! the rows of silver dishes 
     and the store of silver spoons! 
     For Sunday* there's a special pair, 
     And these they polish up with care 
     on Saturday afternoons. 
 
     The Man in the Moon was drinking deep, 

####-     and the cat began to wail; 
     A dish and a  spoon on the table danced, 
     The cow in the garden madly pranced, 
     and the little dog chased his tail. 
 
     The Man in the Moon took another mug, 
     and then rolled beneath his chair; 
     And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, 
     Till in the sky the stars were pale, 
     and dawn was in the air. 
 
     Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 
     'The white horses of the Moon, 
     They neigh and champ their silver bits; 
     But their master's been and drowned his wits, 
     and the Sun'll be rising soon!'  
 
     So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, 
     a jig that would wake the dead: 
     He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, 
     While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: 
     'It's after three!' he said. 
 
     They rolled the Man slowly up the hill 
     and bundled him into the Moon, 
     While his horses galloped up in rear, 
     And the cow came capering like a deer, 
     and a dish ran up with the spoon. 
 
     Now quicker the fiddle went deedle -dum-diddle; 
     the dog began to roar, 
     The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 
     The guests all bounded from their beds 
     and danced upon the floor. 
 
     With a ping and a pong the fiddle -strings broke! 
     the cow jumped over the Moon, 

####-     And the little dog laughed to see such fun, 
     And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
     with the silver Sunday spoon. 
 
     The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
     as the Sun raised up her head. 
     She* hardly believed her fiery eyes; 
     For though it was day, to her surprise 
     they all went back to bed! 
     There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song  
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear 
this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.' 
They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! 
Come on now! Once more!' 
     They made  Frodo have another drink,  and then  begin his  song  again, 
while many of them  joined  in; for the tune was  well known, and  they were 
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with 
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to 
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for  
he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off 
the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their 
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer  
disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor  
without leaving a hole!  
     The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet 
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam, 
who 
found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from 
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But 
there 
was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and 
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he 
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had 
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the 
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. 
     Frodo felt  a fool. Not knowing what else  to do, he crawled away under  

####-the tables to the  dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of 
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back  against the wall and took off the Ring. How 
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he 
had  been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and  that somehow  it had 
slipped on  when he stuck out  his hand with a jerk to save his  fall. For a  
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it 
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt 
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out. 
     'Well?' said Strider, when he rea ppeared.  'Why did you do that?  Worse 
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or  
should I say your finger?' 
     'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. 
     'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but  we had better wait  until the 
uproar has  died down. Then, if you  please, Mr.  Baggins, I should  like  a  
quiet word with you.' 
     'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name. 
     'A matter of  some importance  -  to us both,' answered Strider, looking 
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 
     'Very  well,' said Frodo,  trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk  to 
you later.' 
     Meanwhile an argument was going on by the  fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had 
come trotting  in, and  he was now  trying  to listen to several conflicting 
accounts of the event at the same time. 
     'I saw him, Mr.  Butterbur,' said a hobbit;  'or leastways I didn't see 
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished  into thin air, in a manner of 
speaking.' 
     'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. 
     'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.' 
     'There's some  mistake  somewhere,' said  Butterbur,  shaking his head. 
There was  too much of  that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing  into thin air; or  
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.' 
     'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.  
     'How should I  know?  He's welcome to go  where he will, so long as  he  
pays in the  morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.' 
     'Well,  I  saw what I  saw,  and  I saw what I  didn't,'  said  Mugwort 
obstinately. 
     'And I say there's  some mistake,' repeated  Butterbur,  picking up the 

####-tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 
     'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I 
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' 
     He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed 
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied 
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly  under the  tables after  
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and 
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One 
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.  
The 
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said 
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no 
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. 
     Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,  
that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present 
mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'N ow what have  you been doing,  Mr. 
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks 
with your acrobatics!' 
     'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite 
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' 
     'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling, 
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand  - and warn 
me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,  
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 
     'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise 
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early 
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by  eight o'clock?' 
     'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in 
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought 
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing 
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' 
     'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many 
private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would 
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect 
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br>. Strider 

 
 
     Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no 
light. Merry was not there, and the  fire had burned low.  It  was not until 
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots 
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting 
in a chair by the door! 
     'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' 
     'I  am called Strider,' he answered: 'and  though he may have forgotten 
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.' 
     'You  said  I  might  hear something to my advantage, I  believe,' said 
Frodo. 'What have you to say?' 
     'Several things,' a nswered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply. 
     'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you  what I  know, and 
give you some good advice  - but I shall want a reward.' 
     'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had 
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably  that  he had  brought 
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he 
could not spare any of it. 
     'No more than  you  can afford,' answered  Strider with a slow smile, as 
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you, 
until I wish to leave you.' 
     'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if 
I wanted another  companion, I should  not  agree to any such thing, until I 
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' 
     'Excellent!' exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his legs  and sitting  back  
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to 
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you  
what I know, and leave the reward to  you. You may be glad to grant it, when 
you have heard me.' 
     'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?' 
     'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your 
business --' He got  up and went to the door,  opened it quickly  and looked 
out.  Then  he shut it quietly and  sat  down again. 'I have quick ears,' he 
went  on, lowering his voice, 'and  though I cannot disappear, I have hunted 

####-many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish. 
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four 
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another, but  one  thing interested  me.  Please 
remember, said one of them,  that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I 
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that 
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.  
Baggins  has  an  honest reason  for  leaving his name  behind; but if so, I 
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 
     'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' sa id Frodo 
angrily,  'and I have still to  learn why  it interests you. Mr. Strider may 
have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should 
advise him to explain it.' 
     'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple: 
     I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him 
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret 
that concerned me and my friends.  
     'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam 
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do. 
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every 
shadow!' he said in a  low  voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. 
On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared 
later, 
coming up the Greenway from the south.' 
     There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to 
have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said.  'And  the 
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the 
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have 
stayed quiet in here.' 
     'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your 
going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me 
in to see you, or take a message.' 
     'Do you think he------' began Frodo. 
     'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not 
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled 
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a  
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to 

####-know one another better.  When we do, I hope you will explain  what happened 
at the end of your song. For that little prank ------' 
     'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo. 
     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That  accident has made your 
position dangerous.' 
     'Hardly more than it  was already,' said Frodo.  'I knew these horsemen 
were pursuing me;  but now  at any rate they seem to  have  missed me and to 
have gone away.' 
     'You  must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. 
And more  are  coming. There are others. I know their  number. I know  these 
Riders.' He paused,  and his  eyes were cold and hard. 'And there  are  some 
folk  in Bree who  are  not to be  trusted,'  he went on.  'Bill  Ferny, for  
instance. He  has an evil name in the Bree-land,  and queer folk call at his 
house.  You  must  have  noticed him among the  company:  a swarthy sneering 
fellow.  He  was very close with  one  of  the Southern  strangers, and they 
slipped  out   together  just  after  your  "accident".  Not  all  of  those 
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything  to anybody; 
or make mischief for amusement.' 
     'What  will Ferny sell,  and what has my accident got to do  with him?' 
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.  
     'News  of you,  of  course,'  answered  Strider.  'An  account of  your 
performance would  be very interesting to certain  people.  After that  they 
would hardly  need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely  
that they will hear of it befor e this night is over. Is that enough? You can 
do as you like  about my  reward: take me as a guide  or  not. But I may say 
that I know all the lands  between the Shire and  the Misty Mountains, for I 
have  wandered over  them for many years. I  am  older than  I look. I might  
prove useful. You will  have to leave the  open  road after tonight; for the 
horsemen will  watch  it  night and  day. You may  escape from  Bree, and be 
allowed to  go forward while the Sun is up;  but you won't go far. They will 
come on you in the wild, in some dark  place where  there is no help. Do you 
wish them to find you? They are terrible!' 
     The  hobbits looked at him,  and  saw  with surprise that  his face was 
drawn  as if with pain, and  his hands clenched the arms of  his  chair. The 
room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a 
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening  
to sounds in the Night far away. 

####-     'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.  
'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but 
you do not fear them enough,  yet. Tomorrow you will  have to escape, if you 
can. Strider can take  you by paths that  are  seldom trodden. Will you have 
him? ' 
     There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused 
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he 
broke out: 
     'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns 
and he says take care; and  I say  yes to that, and let's begin with him. He 
comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows 
something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we 
should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he 
puts it.' 
     Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam, 
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. 
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as 
you  choose to  look. You began  to talk to me like the Bree-folk,  but your 
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should 
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?  
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how  
do 
you know it?' 
     'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim 
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get 
to Rivende ll now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must  
make up your  mind. I will answer some of your  questions, if that will help 
you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me 
already? Still here it is------' 
     At that  moment  there  came a  knock at the  door.  Mr. Butterbur  had 
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider 
withdrew into a dark corner. 
     'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the 
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and 
shut the door. 
     'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've 
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll 

####-admit; and  I'm a busy man.  But first one thing and then another  this week  
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, 
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of 
Baggins in particular.' 
     'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo. 
     'Ah! you know best,'  said the landlord, knowingly.  'I won't give  you  
away;  but  I  was  told that  this  Baggins would be going by  the  name of 
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you  well enough, if I may 
say so.' 
     'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting. 
     'A stout  little fellow with red cheeks,' said  Mr. Butterbur solemnly. 
Pippin chuckled,  but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't  help  you  much; it 
goes for  most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with 
a glance at Pippin.  'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, 
and he  has a cleft in his  chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your 
pardon, but he said it, not me.' 
     'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly. 
     'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, 
but he's a  good  friend of mine, whether or no. But now  I  don't know what 
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into 
a block of  wood, I  shouldn't wonder. He's  a  bit hasty. Still what's done 
can't be undone. ' 
     'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow 
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts. 
     'Where was I?' said the landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his fingers.  
'Ah,  yes!  Old Gandalf. Three  months  back he walked  right  into  my room 
without  a  knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in  the  morning.  Will  you  do 
something for me? You've  only to name it,  I said. I'm in a hurry,  said he, 
and  I've no time myself, but I want  a message took to the Shire. Have  you 
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I  said, tomorrow,  
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow,   he says, and then he gave  me  a  
letter. 
     'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr.  Butterbur,  producing a letter  
from his pocket,  and reading out the  address slowly and proudly (he valued  
his reputation as a lettered man): 
     Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. 
     'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo. 

####-     'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 
     'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once, 
and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I 
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.' 
     Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said, 
'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if 
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a -purpose. I put  it by safe. 
Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day 
after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after  
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set  
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it. 
     'Leaving the letter aside, I  promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says 
to  me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way 
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that! 
But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in  
trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be 
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're 
looking  for  Baggins, and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on 
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,  
I 
called  it. Nob, he came and told me that two  black  men were  at  the door  
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid 
the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been 
asking the same  question all the  way to  Archet, I hear. And that  Ranger, 
Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you, 
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.' 
     'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming  forward into  the light.  'And 
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.' 
     The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always 
popping up. What do you want now?' 
      'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo.  'He came to offer me his help.' 
     'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking 
suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up 
with a Ranger.' 
     'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who 

####-only remembers his own name  because people  shout  it at him  all day? They 
cannot stay in The  Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long 
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?' 
     'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur, 
looking  really scared. 'But why can't you stay here  quiet for  a  bit, Mr. 
Underhill?  What are  all  these  queer goings on? What are these black   men 
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' 
     'I'm sorry I  can't explain it all,' answered  Frodo.  'I  am tired and 
very worried, and it's a long tale. But  if you mean to help me, I  ought to 
warn you  that you will be in  danger  as long as I  am in your house. These 
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from------' 
     'They  come from Mordor,'  said  Strider in a low  voice. 'From Mordor, 
Barliman, if that means anything to you.' 
     'Save us!' cried  Mr.  Bu tterbur turning  pale; the  name evidently was 
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It 
is,' said  Frodo. 'Are  you still  willing to help  me?'  'I  am,'  said Mr. 
Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me  can do 
against, against ------' he faltered. 
     'Against the Shadow in the  East,' said  Strider  quietly.  'Not  much, 
Barliman, but  every  little  helps. You  can let  Mr. Underhill  stay  here 
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the  name of Baggins,  till he 
is far away.' 
     'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without 
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity  Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself 
this evening, to  say no more. The story of that  Mr. Bilbo's  going off has 
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he 
is.' 
     'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo. 
     'I hope  not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks  or no spooks,  they 
won't get in The Pony so easy.  Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say 
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while  I can stand on my legs. Me 
and my folk'll keep watch  tonight; but you had best get some  sleep, if you  
can.' 
     'In any case we  must be called at  dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off 
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' 
     'Right!  I'll see to the orders,'  said the landlord. 'Good night,  Mr. 

####-Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night  -  now, bless me! Where's your 
Mr. Brandybuck?' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all 
about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said 
something about going for a breath of air.' 
     'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on 
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see 
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him. 
Good  night  to  you all!'  At  last  Mr. Butterbur  went out,  with another  
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated 
down the passage. 
     'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo 
looked carefully at  the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly  to be 
Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was 
the following message: 
     THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418. 
     Dear Frodo, 
     Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better 
leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at 
latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find 
that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree. 
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the 
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business 
and will help you. Make for  Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I  
do not come, Elrond will advise you. 
     Yours in haste  
     GANDALF. 
     PS. Do NOT use It  again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by 
night! 
     PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men 
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. 
     All that is gold does not glitter, 
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
     The old that is strong does not wither, 
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
     From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 

####-     Renewed shall be blade that was broken, 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
 
 
     PPPS.  I hope  Butterbur  sends  this promptly.  A  worthy man, but his 
memory is  like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he  forgets, I  
shall roast him. 
     Fare Well! 
     Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam. 
'Really  old Butterbur has  made  a mess of things!' he  said. 'He  deserves 
roasting. If  I  had  got this  at  once,  we  might all have  been safe  in 
Rivendell  by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he 
was going into great danger.' 
     'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. 
     Frodo  turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf's 
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend at 
once?' he asked.  'It would have saved time.' 
     'Would it? Would any of  you have believed me till now?' said  Strider. 
'I knew nothing  of this letter.  For  all I knew I  had  to persuade you to 
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend 
to tell you  all about myself at once. I had  to study you  first,  and make 
sure of  you. The  Enemy has set traps  for  me before  now. As soon as I had 
made up my  mind, I was  ready to tell you  whatever  you asked.  But I must 
admit,' he added with a queer laugh,  'that I hoped you would take to me for  
my  own  sake. A  hunted  man sometimes  wearies  of distrust  a nd longs for 
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' 
     'They  are - at first sight at any rate,'  laughed  Pippin with  sudden 
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as 
we  say in the Shire; and  I daresay  we  shall all look much the same after  
lying for days in hedges and ditches.' 
     'It  would  take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering 
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would  die 
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.' 
     Pippin  subsided; but  Sam was not  daunted, and he  still eyed Strider  
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the  Strider that  Gandalf speaks about?' 
he  demanded. 'You  never  mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You  
might be  a  play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with 

####-you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have 
you to say to that?' 
     'That you are a stout fellow,' answered  Strider;   'but I am  afraid my 
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I 
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk. 
If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!' 
     He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a  
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the 
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to 
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 
     'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them 
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and 
if by life or death I can save you, I will.' 
     There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation.  'I 
believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at 
least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never  
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of 
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.' 
     'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it? All 
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.' 
     'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out 
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's 
letter, if you have never seen it?' 
     'I did not  know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and  those verses go 
with  that  name.' He  drew out his swor d,  and they saw that  the blade was 
indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said 
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.' 
     Sam said nothing. 
     'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled. 
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we 
are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it  
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or  
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the 
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.' 
     'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?' 
     'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here 
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a  

####-chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. 
After Weathertop our  journey will become more difficult, and  we shall have 
to choose between various dangers.' 
     'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is, 
or what he is doing?' 
     Strider looked  grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came  west with him 
in the spring.  I have often kept watch  on  the borders of the Shire in the 
last few years,  when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We 
last met on the first  of May: at  Sam  Ford down the Brandywine. He told me 
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for  
Rivendell in the last week  of September. As I knew  he  was at your side, I 
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill;  for plainly some 
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. 
     'I am troubled, for the  first time  since I have known  him. We should 
have had messages, even if he  could not come himself. When I returned, many 
days  ago, I heard the ill  news.  The tidings had gone  far  and wide  that 
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of 
Gildor that told me this;  and  later  they told me that you had  left  your 
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I  have  been watching 
the East Road anxiously.' 
     'Do  you  think  the Black Riders  have  anything to do  with it  - with 
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  do  not know of anything else  that could have hindered him, except 
the  Enemy himself,'  said  Strider. 'But do not give  up  hope! Gandalf  is 
greater than you Shire-folk know  -  as a rule you can only see his jokes and 
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.' 
     Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of 
all  the danger and worry  I must go to  bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is 
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in 
the dark to look for him.' 
     At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the 
passage. Merry came  in  with a  rush followed  by  Nob.  He shut  the  door  
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They  stared at him in 
alarm for  a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen  them, Frodo! I have seen 
them! Black Riders!' 
     'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?' 
     'Here. In the village. I  stayed indoors for  an  hour. Then as you did 

####-not  come  back, I  went out  for a  stroll.  I  had come back again and was 
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I 
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son 
of deeper shade among the shadows across the  road, just beyond the edge  of 
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was 
no horse.' 
     'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry 
started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo. 
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 
     'It seemed to make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,' continued Merry. 'I  
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the 
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' 
     Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; 
'but it was foolish.' 
     'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could 
hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and 
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the  other  was 
whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not 
creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt 
terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when 
something came behind me and I... I fell over.' 
     'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a  
lantern. I went down to West -gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just 
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I  
couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over  
something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there 
was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He 
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water," he says to 
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he 
got up and ran back here like a hare. ' 
     'I am  afraid that's true,'  said Merry, 'though I  don't know  what  I 
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't  
know what came over me.' 
     'I  do,' said Strider.  'The Black Breath. The  Riders  must have  left 
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They  
will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably  
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before 

####-we leave Bree.' 
     'What  will happen?'  said  Merry.  'Will they attack the inn?'  'No, I 
think not,' said Strider.  'They are not all here yet. And in any  case that 
is not their way. In dark and loneliness  they are strongest; they will  not 
openly attack a house where ther e are lights and many people -not until they 
are desperate, not while all the  long  leagues of Eriador still  lie before 
us.  But their  power  is in  terror, and already some in Bree are in  their 
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of 
the strangers, and, maybe,  the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at 
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when 
they 
left him.' 
     'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do? ' 
     'Stay here, and do not  go to  your rooms! They are sure  to have found 
out which those  are. The hobbit-rooms  have windows looking north and close 
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. 
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.' 
     While Strider was  gone, Frodo gave Merry a  rapid account of all  that 
had happened since supper. Merry was  still reading and  pondering Gandalf's 
letter when Strider and Nob returned. 
     'Well Masters,' said  Nob, 'I've ruffled up  the clothes  and  put in a  
bolster down the  middle of  each bed.  And I made a  nice imitation of your  
head  with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag  - Underhill,  sir,' he added with  a  
grin. 
     Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!'  he said. 'But  wha t will happen when 
they have penetrated the disguise?' 
     'We shall  see,'  said  Strider.  'Let us hope  to hold the  fort  till 
morning.' 
     'Good  night to  you,' said Nob, and went off to take  his part in  the 
watch on the doors.  
     Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour -floor. They pushed a  low 
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering  out, Frodo saw that the 
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of  
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred  the heavy inside shutters and drew the  
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.  
     The  hobbits lay  down  on their blankets  with their feet  towards the 
hearth; but  Strider settled himself  in the chair against  the  door .  They 

####-talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. 
     'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his 
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. 
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.' 
     'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one 
the hobbits dropped off to sleep. 
 
