 

 
 
     'Now we had  better get home  ourselves,' said  Merry. There's something 
funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.' 
     They turned down  the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept  and  
edged with  large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards  or so  it brought  
them to  the  river -bank,  where there was a broad wooden  landing-stage.  A 
large  flat  ferry-boat was  moored beside it.  The white  bollards near the 
water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind  them 
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before 
them was dark,  with only  a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by 
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side. 
     Merry  led the pony  over a gangway  on to  the ferry,  and the  others 
followed.  Merry  then  pushed slowly off with  a  long pole. The Brandywine 
flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and 
up it a  winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
there. Behind loomed  up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds 
of mist, shone many  round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows 
of 
Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.  
     Long  ago Gorhendad Oldbuck,  head of the  Oldbuck family,  one of  the 
oldest  in  the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed  the river, which 
was the original  boundary of  the land  eastwards. He built (and excavated)  
Brandy  Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,  and settled  down  to  become 
master of  what was virtually  a small independent country. His  family grew 
and grew,  and after his days  continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied 
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,  
and about a hundred windows. The  Brandybucks and  their numerous 
dependants 
then  began  to burrow, and later to  build,  all round about. That was  the 
origin  of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old 
Forest, a sort  of colony from the Shire. Its  chief village was Bucklebury, 
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. 
     The people in the Marish were  friendly with the Bucklanders,  and  the 
authority of the Master  of the  Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck  family 

####-was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock  and Rushey. 
But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, 
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very 
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: 
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim. 
     Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side 
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations 
ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all 
the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river, 
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the 
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course,  it was 
not  a complete  protection.  The Forest  drew  close  to the hedge in  many 
places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also 
was not usual in the Shire. 
     The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew 
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river  
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his 
old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched 
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone 
on living quietly at Bag End. 
     The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and 
Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been 
looking ba ck, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: 
     'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?' 
     On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a  
figure: it looked like a  dark black bundle left behind. But a s they  looked 
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It  
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.  
     'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry. 
     'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask  any  more 
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the 
bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and 
nothing could be seen. 
     'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo.  
'Can horses cross the river?' 
     'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might 
swim,'  answered  Merry. 'Though  I  never heard of any horse  swimming  the 

####-Brandywine. But what have  horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's 
get indoors and then we can talk.' 
     'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell 
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.' 
     'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo;  'but we could 
do with another.' 
     'You shall have it! Give  me that basket!' said  Merry, and  rode ahead 
into the darkness.  
     It  was some distance from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo's new  house  at 
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the 
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from 
the Bridge. Half a mile northward  along this they came to a lane opening on  
their  right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it  climbed up and 
down into the country. 
     At last  they  came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be 
seen  of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of 
a wide  circle of  lawn surrounded by  a belt of  low trees inside the outer  
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an  out-of-the-way corner of 
the country, and there were  no other dwellings close  by.  You could get in 
and out  without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the 
Brandybucks, for the use  of guests, or members of the family that wished to 
escape  from  the  crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for a  time.  It  was an 
old-fashioned  countrified house, as much like a hobbit -hole as possible: it 
was long and low,  with no  upper storey; and it had a roof  of  turf, round 
windows, and a large round door. 
     As they walked lip the green path  from  the gate no light was visible; 
the  windows  were dark and shuttered.  Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty 
Bolger opened it . A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and 
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on 
either side; in  front  of them a  passage ran back  down the  middle of the 
house. 
     'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We 
have  done our  best in  a short time to make it  look  like home. After all 
Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.' 
     Frodo looked  round.  It did  look like home. Many of his own favourite 
things -  or Bilbo's things (they  reminded  him sharply of him in their new 
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been  at Bag End. 

####-It  was  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and he found himself 
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement. 
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he 
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave 
them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very 
night, before they all went to bed. 
     'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have 
moved at all.' 
     The  travellers hung  up their  cloaks,  and piled  their packs  on the 
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end. 
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam. 
     'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!' 
     'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest 
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.' 
     'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't 
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are 
three tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats 
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!' 
     Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage, 
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper. 
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound 
of 
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above 
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs. 
     Sing hey! for the bath at close of day 
     that washes the weary mud away! 
     A loon is he that will not sing: 
     O! Water Hot is a noble thing! 
 
     O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, 
     and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; 
     but better than rain or rippling streams 
     is Water Hot that smokes and steams. 
 
     O! Water cold we may pour at need 
     down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 
     but better is Beer, if drink we lack, 

####-     and Water Hot poured down the back. 
 
     O! Water is fair that leaps on high 
     in a fountain white beneath the sky; 
     but never did fountain sound so sweet 
     as splashing Hot Water with my feet! 
     There  was a terrific  splash, and  a  shout  of  Whoa! from  Frodo. It 
appeared that a lot of Pippin's  bath had imitated a fountain and leaped  on 
high. 
     Merry went  to the door: 'What about supper a nd beer in the throat?' he 
called. Frodo came out drying his hair. 
     'There's so much  water  in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to 
finish,' he said. 
     'Lawks!' said Merry, looking  in. The  stone floor  was swimming.  'You  
ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said. 
'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.' 
     They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you  
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope. 
     'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin. 
     'They're mine!'  said Frodo. 'Given to me  by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among 
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.' 
     Hobbits have a passion  for mushrooms,  surpassing  even  the greediest  
likings  of Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly explains young Frodo's long 
expeditions  to  the renowned fields of the Marish,  and the  wrath  of  the 
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to 
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they 
had  finished even Fatty Bolger heaved  a sigh  of content. They pushed back 
the table, and drew chairs round the fire. 
     'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all  about it! I guess 
that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I 
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with 
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was 
scared, if that is possible.' 
     'We  have all been  scared,' said Pippin after a pause,  in which Frodo 
stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been,  too, if you had 
been chased for two days by Black Riders.' 
     'And what are they?' 

####-     'Black figures  riding  on black horses,'  answered Pippin.  'If  Frodo 
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave 
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam 
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 
     'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not 
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in 
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?' 
     'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come 
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than 
Farmer  Maggot's  guess  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old Bilbo's 
treasure.' 
     'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not know 
anything.' 
     'Old Maggot is  a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his 
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go 
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good 
many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think  
his guess good or bad.' 
     'I think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as 
it  goes. There is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders 
are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say  searching,  for him or for me. I 
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not 
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if 
he was afraid  they would  su ddenly give  way.  The others looked at him  in 
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves. 
     'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded. 
     'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as 
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got 
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.' 
     'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of 
it myself.' 
     'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this, 
my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say 
good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on 
you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at 
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.' 
     Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so 

####-comical that they laughed. 'Dear  old  Frodo!' said Pippin.  'Did you really 
think you had thrown dust in  all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful 
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying 
farewell  to  all your haunts all this  year since April. We have constantly 
heard you  muttering:  "Shall  I  ever   look  down into that valley again, I 
wonder",  and things like that.  And pretending that you had come to the end  
of  your  money,  and  actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those 
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.' 
     'Good  heavens!'  said Frodo. 'I thought  I had been  both  careful and 
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all  the Shire discussing my  
departure then?' 
     'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for  
long,  of  course;  but  at  present it  is,  I  think,  only  known  to  us 
conspirators. After  all, you must remember  that we know you  well, and are 
often with  you.  We can usually guess what you are thinking. I  knew Bilbo,  
too. To  tell you the truth,  I had been watching you  rather  closely  ever  
since he  left. I thought you would go  after him sooner or  later; indeed I 
expected you  to go sooner, and lately we have  been very  anxious.  We have 
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly,  all on 
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and  
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape 
so easily!' 
     'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It  is 
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have 
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!' 
     'You  do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You  must go  - and therefore we 
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow,  and 
would jump down a dragon's throat to  save you, if he did not trip over  his 
own feet; but  you  will  need  more than one  companion in  your  dangerous 
adventure.' 
     'My dear  and  most beloved hobbits!'  said Frodo deeply  moved. 'But I 
could not  allow it. I decided that  long ago, too. You speak of danger, but 
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt,  no there-and -back journey.  
I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.' 
     'Of course  we understand,'  said Merry  firmly.  'That is why we  have 
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to 
do our best to help you against the Enemy.' 

####-     'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed. 
     'Yes, the Ring,' said  Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't  allow for  
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring 
for years  - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded 
it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our 
conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was 
too young, and he was also more careful  - but  he was not careful enough. If 
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.' 
     'Go on!' said Frodo faintly. 
     'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might 
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the  
road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, 
coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I 
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary 
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I 
was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was 
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of 
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket. 
     'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But 
you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I 
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the 
old fellow's secret book.' 
     'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing 
safe?' 
     'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one 
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I 
wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it, 
Frodo?' 
     'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.' 
     'Well, as  I  was saying,' Merry  proceeded, 'I  kept my  knowledge  to 
myself,  till  this Spring  when  things got  serious. Then  we  formed  our 
conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not  
been too scrupulous. You are  not a very easy  nut to crack,  and Gandalf is 
worse. But if  you want to be  introduced  to our chief investigator, I  can 
produce him.' 
     'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked 
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. 

####-     'Step forward, Sam!'  said Merry; and  Sam stood up with a face scarlet 
up to  the ears.  'Here's our collector of  information! And he  collected a  
lot, I  can tell you, before he was finally  caught. After which, I may say, 
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.' 
     'Sam!' cried  Frodo,  feeling that amazement could  go no  further, and 
quite  unable  to decide whether he felt angry,  amused, relieved, or merely 
foolish. 
     'Yes, sir!' said Sam.  'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant  no wrong 
to you, Mr.  Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf  for that matter. He  has some sense, 
mind you; and when you  said  go alone, he  said no! lake someone as you can 
trust.' 
     'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo.  Sam looked 
at him unhappily.  'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can 
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you  
can trust us to keep any secret of yours  - closer than you keep it yourself.  
But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off  without a  
word. We  are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what 
Gandalf has  told you. We know  a good deal about the Ring. We  are horribly 
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.' 
     'And after all, sir,'  added Sam,  'you did  ought to  take the  Elves' 
advice.  Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny 
it.' 
     'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I 
don't  deny it, but I'll never believe you  are  sleeping again, whether you  
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure. 
     'You are a set  of deceitful  scoundrels!'  he  said,  turning  to  the 
others.  'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give 
in. I will take Gildor's  advice.  If the danger were not  so dark, I should 
dance for joy. Even so,  I cannot  help feeling  happy; happier than I  have 
felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.' 
     'Good!  That's  settled. Three cheers  for  Captain Frodo and company!' 
they shouted;  and  they  danced round him. Merry and  Pippin  began a song, 
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. 
     It was made on  the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo  on  his 
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: 
     Farewell we call to hearth and hall! 
     Though wind may blow and rain may fall, 

####-     We must away ere break of day 
     Far over wood and mountain tall. 
 
     To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell 
     In glades beneath the misty fell, 
     Through moor and waste we ride in haste, 
     And whither then we cannot tell. 
 
     With foes ahead, behind us dread, 
     Beneath the sky shall be our bed, 
     Until at last our toil be passed, 
     Our journey done, our errand sped. 
 
     We must away! We must away! 
     We ride before the break of day! 
     'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for  tonight at any rate.' 
     'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before 
the break of day?' 
     'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am 
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which 
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should 
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed 
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two 
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could 
we 
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 
     'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get 
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except  for  
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.' 
     'It seems to have been  a  very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But 
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?' 
     'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found 
you here,' answered Merry. 'They could  have reached here  by now, of course, 
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the 
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them 

####-through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they 
would try  to keep them out, I think, at any  rate until  they got a message 
through to the Master of the Hall  - for they would not like the  look of the 
Riders, and would certainly be  frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland 
cannot resist a determined attack for  long. And it  is possible that in the 
morning even a Black Rider that rode  up  and asked for Mr. Baggins would be 
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back  to  live 
at Crickhollow.' 
     Frodo  sat for  a while in thought. 'I have made  up  my mind,' he said 
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going 
by road: it  would be safer  to  wait here than  that.  If  I go through the 
North-gate my departure from  Buckland  will  be  known at once, instead  of 
being secret for  several days at least,  as it might be. And  what is more, 
the Bridge and the  East Road  near the  borders  will certainly be watched, 
whether  any Rider gets into  Buckland or not. We don't know  how many there 
are; but there are at least  two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is 
to go off in a qu ite unexpected direction.' 
     'But that  can only mean going  into  the  Old  Forest!'  said Fredegar 
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 
Black Riders.' 
     'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very  desperate, but I believe Frodo 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed  at once. 
With luck we might gel a considerable start.' 
     'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No 
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.' 
     'Oh yes they  do!'  said  Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in   - occasionally 
when the fit takes  them. We have  a  private entrance. Frodo  went in once, 
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when 
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.' 
     'Well, do  as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of  the 
Old  Forest  than of anything I  know about:  the  stories  about  it  are a  
nightmare; but  my  vote hardly counts,  as I am  not going on the  journey. 
Still, I am very glad  someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what 
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' 
     Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, 
nor to see what lay  outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from 
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine 

####-Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was 
to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as 
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He 
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing  
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 
     'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not  
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether 
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk  
a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty 
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we 
have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing 
tomorrow.' 
     'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our 
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.' 
     'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll 
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.' 
     'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still 
got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get 
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.' 
     When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time. 
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high 
window over  a dark  sea of tangled trees.  Down below among the roots there 
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would  
smell him out sooner or later. 
     Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a  
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was 
not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in 
waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he 
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath, 
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him 
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over  
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge 
towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a  
noise of thunder. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 6.</h4> <br> The Old Forest 

 
 
     Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in  the room. Merry was standing 
there with a candle  in one hand, and banging  on the  door with the  other. 
'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. 
     'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is  time to get up. It is half past four 
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin 
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be 
the  baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up  and  
see us off.' 
     Soon after  six o'clock the  five  hobbits were  ready  to start. Fatty 
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in 
front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that  went through 
a spinney behind  the house, and then  cut across several fields. The leaves 
of  trees were  glistening, and every twig  was dripping; the grass was grey 
with  cold dew. Everything was  still,  and far-away  noises seemed near and 
clear:  fowls chattering  in a yard,  someone closing a  door of  a  distant 
house. 
     In their shed they found the ponies;  sturdy  little beasts of the kind 
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for  a long day's work. They mounted, 
and  soon  they  were  riding off  into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open 
reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for  
about  an  hour,  slowly  and without talking,  they  saw  the Hedge looming  
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over  with silver cobwebs.  'How  are 
you  going to get  through  this?'  asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, 
'and you will see.' He turned to the  left  along  the Hedge, and  soon they 
came to a point  wher e it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A 
cutting  had been made, at  some distance from the  Hedge, and  went sloping 
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at  the sides, which rose 
steadily,  until suddenly  they arched  over a nd formed a  tunnel that dived 
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. 
     Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he  said.  'I wish you were 
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the 
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!' 
     'If there  are no worse things ahead  than  the Old Forest, I  shall be 
lucky,'  said  Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the  East Road: we  shall 

####-soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.'  'Good-bye!' they cried, and 
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel. 
     It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of 
thick -set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had 
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock  
clicked. The sound was ominous. 
     'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and 
on the edge of the Old Forest.' 
     'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin. 
     'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the 
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses  used to tell him, about goblins and wolves 
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them. 
But the  Forest is queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more 
aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And 
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content 
merely to  watch  you,  as  long  a s  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much. 
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root 
out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most  
alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after  
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering 
to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; 
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees 
do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long  
ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,  
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and 
made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long 
strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they 
became very unfriendly.  There  is  still a wide  bare  space not far inside 
where the bonfire was made.' 
     'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin. 
     'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the 
far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen 
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one 
finds 
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer 
fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the 
beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on 

####-more  or less in our direction, east and a little  north. That is the path I 
am going to try and find.' 
     The hobbits now left the tunnel -gate and rode across  the  wide hollow.  
On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a  
hundred yards a nd more beyond  the Hedge;  but it  vanished  as  soon as  it 
brought them under the trees.  Looking back they could see the  dark line of 
the  Hedge  through  the stems of trees  that were already thick about them. 
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes  and  
shapes: straight  or bent,  twisted, leaning,  squat  or slender, smooth  or  
gnarled and branched;  and all the stems were green  or grey with  moss  and  
slimy, shaggy growths.  
     Merry alone  seemed fairly cheerful.  'You had  better lead  on and find 
that path,'  Frodo  said to him.  'Don't  let us lose one another, or forget 
which way the Hedge lies!' 
     They picked a  way  among the trees, and  their  ponies plodded  along, 
carefully  avoiding the many  writhing  and interlacing roots. There  was no 
undergrowth. The ground was  rising  steadily,  and as they went  forward it  
seemed  that the trees became  taller, darker,  and  thicker. There  was  no 
sound,  except  an occasional drip  of  moisture falling  through  the still 
leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was no  whispering  or movement  among the 
branches; but  they  all got  an uncomfortable feeling that they were  being 
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.  The feeling 
steadily  grew, until they found  themselves looking up quickly, or glancing 
back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.  
     There was not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a path,  and  the  trees  seemed 
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly  felt that he could not bear it 
any longer, and without warning let out  a shout. 'Oi! Oi!' he  cried. 'I am 
not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!' 
     The others halted startled; but the  cry  fell as if muffled by a heavy 
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood  seemed to  become 
more 
crowded and more watchful than before. 
     'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than 
good.' 
     Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, a nd if 
he had been right  to make  the others come into this abominable wood. Merry 
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. 

####-Pippin noticed it. 'It  has not taken you long to lose  us,' he said. But at 
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead. 
     'Well, well!'  he  said. 'These trees do  shift.  There is the  Bonfire 
Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved 
away!' 
     The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of 
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above 
them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest -roof they 
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing, 
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and 
greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid 
wall. No tree grew there,  only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and 
faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and 
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and 
cheerful garden after the close Forest. 
     The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening 
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the 
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into 
the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the 
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path  they 
rode. They were  still climbing gently, but they now  went much quicker, and 
with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and 
was going to let them pass unhindered after all. 
     But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew 
close again  on either side, and they  could  no longer  see far ahead.  Now 
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on 
them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on 
dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in 
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank  
to a murmur. 
     O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
     despair not! For though dark they stand, 
     all woods there be must end at last, 
     and see the open sun go past: 
     the setting sun, the rising sun, 
     the day's end, or the day begun. 

####-     For east or west all woods must fail... 
     Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded  into  silence. The air 
seemed  heavy and the making  of  words wearisome. Just behind them  a large 
branch fell from an  old overhanging tree with  a crash into  the  path. The 
trees seemed to close in before them. 
     'They  do not  like all that about ending and failing,' said  Merry. 'I  
should not sing any  more  at present. Wait till we do  get to the edge, and 
then we'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!' 
     He spoke cheerfully, and if  he felt any great anxiety, he did not show 
it. The  others did not  answer.  They were depressed.  A heavy  weight  was 
settling steadily  on  Frodo's  heart, and he regretted now with every  step 
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace  of the trees. He 
was, indeed,  just  about  to stop and propose going back (if that was still 
possible), when  things took  a  new  turn. The  path  stopped climbing, and 
became for a while nearly  level. The dark trees drew aside, and  ahead they 
could see  the path  going  almost  straight forward.  Before them, but some 
distance off, there stood a  green  hill-top, treeless, rising  like a  bald 
head out of the  encircling wood. The  path seemed to be making directly for  
it. 
     They now hurried forward again,  delighted with the thought of climbing 
out  for  a  while above the roof  of the Forest. The path dipped, and  then 
again began  to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep 
hillside.  There  it left the trees and faded into the turf.  The wood stood 
all round the hill like  thick  hair that ended sharply in  a circle round a  
shaven crown. 
     The hobbits  led their  ponies up, winding  round and  round until they 
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming 
and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near  at 
hand the mist was now almost gone;  though here and there it lay  in hollows 
of the wood, and to  the south  of  them, out of a deep  fold cutting  right 
across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke. 
     'That,'  said Merry, pointing  with his hand, 'that  is the line of the 
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through 
the 
midst of the  Forest to join the  Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to 
go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be  the  queerest part of the 
whole wood  - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.' 

####-     The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they 
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it 
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.  
     The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been a bout 
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in 
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the 
Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they 
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the 
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea  
of trees, and the horizon was veiled. 
     On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the 
slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like 
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep 
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them, 
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they 
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay 
beyond  the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for  it  was 
good to see a sight of anything beyond the  wood's border s,  though they did  
not mean to go  that way,  if  they  could help it: the Barrow-downs  had as 
sinister a reputation in hobbit -legend as the Forest itself.  
     At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had 
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not  
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the 
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must 
actually be heading towards the Withywindle va lley: not at all the direction 
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this 
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to 
see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be 
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed  
lo  be drier  and more  open,  climbing up to slopes  where  the  trees were 
thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange 
and nameless trees  of the denser wood. 
     At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair 
speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they 
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees 
began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be 
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered 

####-unexpectedly, like the ruts of great  giant-wheels or  wide moats and sunken 
roads long disused and choked with  brambles. These lay usually right across 
their  line  of march, and could only be crossed  by scrambling down and out 
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they 
climbed down they found the  hollow  filled  with  thick bushes  and  matted 
undergrowth, which somehow would not  yield to the  left, but only  gave way 
when they turned to the right; and they  had to go some  distance along  the 
bottom before they could find a  way up  the  further bank.  Each  time they 
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and  darker;  and always  to the left 
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the  
right and downwards.  
     After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though 
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They 
were being headed off,  and were simply following a course chosen for them - 
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. 
     The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled  into a  
fold that was  wider and  deeper than any they had yet met. It  was so sleep 
and  overhung that  it proved  impossible  to climb out  of it again, either  
forwards  or  backwards, without  leaving  their ponies  and  their  baggage 
behind. All  they could do  was to  follow  the fold - downwards. The ground 
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they  
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy 
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and 
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully 
over -arched by trees high above them. 
     After stumbling along for some way along  the  stream, they came  quite 
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before 
them.  Coming  to the opening they found  that they had  made their way down 
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide 
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank  
almost as  steep. A golden  afternoon  of  late sunshine lay warm and drowsy 
upon  the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a  dark 
river  of brown  water,  bordered with ancient  willows,  arched  over  with 
willows, blocked  with fallen willows,  and flecked with thousands  of faded 
willow-leaves.  The  air was thick  with  them, fluttering  yellow from  the 
branches;  for there  was a  warm  and gentle breeze blowing  softly   in the  
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. 

####-     'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry. 
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is 
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.' 
     He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.  
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground 
between the cliff-foot and the river; in  some places firm turf went down to 
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he  said, 'there seems to be something like 
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and 
follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest 
eventually.' 
     'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and 
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track, 
do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting  
very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe 
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should  
have to go?' 
     'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down 
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to 
make 
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.' 
     There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to 
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and  grasses were lush 
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy 
to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among 
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down 
gullies into the Wi thywindle  out of the higher  forest -lands,  and at these 
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.  
     The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all 
kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their 
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches 
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the 
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs, 
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. 
     Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him 
Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard 
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool 
under the willows. Less flies!' 

####-     Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come  on!' he  cried. 'We  can't  
have a  nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were 
too far gone to care. Besi de them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.  
     Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep overwhelming him.  His head swam. 
There now seemed  hardly a sound  in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. 
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing,  a soft  fluttering as of a song 
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes 
and  saw leaning over him a  huge willow-tree,  old  and hoary. Enormous  it  
looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up like  reaching  arms with  many 
long-fingered hands,  its knotted and twisted trunk gaping  in wide fissures 
that creaked faintly as the boughs  moved. The leaves fluttering against the 
bright sky dazzled  him,  and he toppled over, lying where  he fell upon the 
grass. 
     Merry and Pippin dragged themselves  forward  and  lay down  with their  
backs to  the willow-trunk.  Behind them  the  great  cracks gaped  wide  to 
receive them as the  tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and 
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their 
eyes, and  then it seemed  that  they  could almost hear words,  cool words,  
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell 
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. 
     Frodo   lay for  a while  fighting with  the sleep that was overpowering 
him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his feel again. He  felt  a  
compelling  desire for cool water.  'Wait for me,  Sam,' he  stammered.  'Must  
bathe feet a minute.' 
     Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward  side of the tree, 
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like  gnarled  dragonets 
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel 
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back  
against the tree. 
     Sam sat down and  scratched his head, and yawned like a  cavern. He was 
worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting late,  and  he  thought  this  sudden 
sleepiness  uncanny.  'There's more  behind this than sun and warm air,'  he 
muttered  to himself.  'I don't like this great big tree. I  don't trust it. 
Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' 
     He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become 
of the ponies. He found that  two had wandered on a good way along the path; 
and he had just  caught them and brought them back towards the others,  when 

####-he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was 
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise 
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. 
     He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge, 
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was 
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the  jacket, and dragged him  from  under 
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once 
he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 
     'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree  threw me in! I 
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 
     'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit 
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.' 
     'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dr eams 
they are having.' 
     They went round to the other side of the tree, and  then Sam understood 
the click that he had heard. Pippin  had vanished. The crack by which he had 
laid himself had closed together, so that  not  a chink could be seen. Merry 
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, 
but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped 
like a pair of pincers.  
     Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain. 
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held 
poor Merry. It was quite useless.  
     'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever  
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow! ' He 
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly 
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves 
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 
     'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked 
Sam. 
     'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That 
wouldn't be much use.' 
     'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood. 
'We might do something with fire!' 
     'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin 
alive inside.' 
 

####- 
     'We might try  to hurt or  frighten  this tree to begin with,' said Sam 
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go,  I'll  have it down,  if  I have to gnaw 
it.' He  ran to the ponies and before  long  came back with two tinder -boxes 
and a hatchet. 
     Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits  of bark; and made 
a  pile  of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These  they heaped against  the 
trunk  on the far side of the tree from  the prisoners. As soon  as Sam  had 
struck  a spark into  the tinder,  it kindled the dry grass  and a flurry of 
flame and smoke went up. The  twigs crackled. Little fingers  of fire licked 
against  the dry scored rind of  the ancient tree and scorched  it. A tremor  
ran through the whole  willow. The leaves  seemed to hiss above their  heads 
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud  scream came from Merry, and from far 
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 
     'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you  
don't. He says so!' 
     'Who?  What?' shouted Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the other side of the 
tree. 
     'Put  it out! Put it  out!'  begged Merry.  The  branches of the wi llow 
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading 
outwards  to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they 
had  dropped a stone into the quiet slumber  of the river -valley and  set up 
ripples  of anger that  ran out  over the  whole  Forest. Sam kicked at  the 
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of 
why he did so, or what he hoped  for, ran  along the path crying help! help! 
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill 
voice: it  was  blown away  from  him by  the willow-wind and drowned  in  a  
clamour of leaves,  as soon as the  words left his mouth. He felt desperate: 
lost and witless.  
     Suddenly  he  slopped.  There was an answer, or  so  he  thought; but it 
seemed  to come from  behind him, away down  the  path  further back in  the 
Forest.  He turned round and listened, and soon  there  could  be no  doubt: 
someone was  singing a song; a deep glad voice  was  singing  carelessly and 
happily, but it was singing nonsense: 
     Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! 
     Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 
     Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! 

####-     Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both 
stood still. Suddenly  out of  a long string of  nonsense-words (or so  they 
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: 
     Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling! 
     Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. 
     Down  along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, 
     Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, 
     There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter, 
     Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. 
     Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing 
     Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? 
     Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o, 
     Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! 
     Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! 
     Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. 
     Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?  
     Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves 
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was  another burst of song, and 
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the 
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in 
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it 
seemed.  At any rate he wa s  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite 
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one, 
slumping along with  great yellow  boots on  his  thick legs,  and  charging 
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to  drink. He had a blue coat 
and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red 
as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his 
hands  he carried  on a  large  leaf  as  on a tray  a  small pile  of white 
water -lilies.  
     'Help!' cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him with their  hands 
stretched out. 
     'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and 
they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little 
fellows, where be you a -going to, puffing like a  bellows? What's the matter  
here  then?  Do  you  know who I am? I'm  Tom Bombadil.  Tell me what's 
your 

####-trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 
     'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly. 
     'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam. 
     'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil,  leaping up  in the air. 'Old Man Willow? 
Naught  worse than that, eh? That  can soon  be mended. I know the  tune for 
him.  Old  grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his  marrow cold, if he don't behave 
himself. I'll  sing his roots off. I'll sing a  wind up  and blow  leaf  and 
branch  away.  Old Man  Willow!' Setting down his  lilies carefully  on  the 
grass, he  ran to  the tree. There he saw Merry's feet  still sticking out  - 
the rest had already  been  drawn further inside. Tom  put his mouth to  the 
crack  and  began singing  into it in a  low voice. They could not catch the 
words, but  evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick.  Tom sprang 
away,  and breaking off a hanging branch smote  the side of the  willow with  
it. 'You  let  them  out  again, Old  Man Willow!'  he  said. 'What  be  you  
a-thinking  of? You  should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! 
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized  Merry's feet and drew him 
out of the suddenly widening crack. 
     There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it 
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then  with  a loud snap both cracks 
closed fast again.  A shudder ran  through  the tree  from root to  tip, and 
complete silence fell. 
     'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other. 
     Tom Bombadil burst out  laughing.  'Well,  my little fellows!' said he, 
stooping  so that he peered into their  faces. 'You shall come home with me!  
The  table is  all laden with  yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread  and 
butter. Goldberry is  waiting. Time  enough  for questions around the supper  
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up 
his  lilies, and then with a beckoning  wave  of  his hand  went hopping and 
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. 
     Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed  a fter him 
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in 
front  of them,  and the noise of his singing got fainter  and further away. 
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!  
     Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! 
     Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle. 
     Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 
     When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, 

####-     Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.  
     Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! 
     Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. 
     Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you! 
     After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to 
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of 
evening glittering on the  Brandywine River, and  the windows  of Bucklebury 
beginning  to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; 
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White  
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the 
roots  of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a  
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. 
     It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their 
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on 
either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught 
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the 
twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the 
wood. They  began to feel that  all this  country was unreal,  and that they 
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. 
     Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed 
that the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began to murmur. In  the 
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the  river flowed over  
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left  
behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass 
welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily 
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars,  which 
were already shining in the sky. 
     The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown 
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. 
The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It 
wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry 
night; and there,  still high  above them  on a further slope, they saw  the 
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up aga in, up 
a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow 
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom 
Bombadil's  house  before them, up,  down,  under hill. Behind  it  a  steep 
shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of 

####-the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. 
     They  all hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies. Already  half  their 
weariness  and all their fears  had fallen from them. Hey! Come  merry  dol! 
rolled out the song to greet them. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! 
     Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 
     Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! 
     Then  another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like  the 
song of a glad water flowing  down  into  the night from a bright morning in 
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: 
     Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 
     Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, 
     Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, 
     Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, 
     Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: 
     Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! 
     And  with that song the hobbits stood upon  the threshold, and a golden 
light was all about them. 
 
